README.md, before:

# WebSSH2 - Web SSH Client

![Orthrus Mascot](images/orthrus2.png)

WebSSH2 is an HTML5 web-based terminal emulator and SSH client. It uses SSH2 as a client on a host to proxy a Websocket / Socket.io connection to an SSH2 server.

![WebSSH2 demo](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1668075/182425293-acc8741e-cc92-4105-afdc-9538e1685d4b.gif)

![WebSSH2 Screenshot](images/Screenshot.png)

## Table of Contents

- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Breaking Changes](#breaking-changes)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Docker Setup](#docker-setup)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Features](#features)
- [Routes](#routes)
- [Client-Side Module](#client-side-module)
- [Tips](#tips)
- [Support](#support)

## Requirements

- Node.js 6.9.1

## Breaking Changes
- See [CONFIG.md](./CONFIG.md) for a list of breaking changes to the config.json file.
- See [DEPRECATED.md](./DEPRECATED.md) for a list of deprecated options.

## Installation

1. Clone the repository:
   ```
   git clone https://github.com/billchurch/webssh2.git
   cd webssh2
   ```

2. Install dependencies:
   ```
   npm install --production
   ```
   For development purposes, use `npm install` instead.

3. Configure the application by editing `config.json` if needed.

4. Start the server:
   ```
   npm start
   ```

## Docker Setup

1. Build and run the Docker container (with debug messages):
   ```bash
   docker build -t webssh2 .
   docker run --name webssh2 --rm -it -p 2222:2222 -e "DEBUG=webssh2*,-webssh2:ssh2" webssh2
   ```

### Important Note About Configuration Files

As of recent versions, the configuration file location has moved from `/usr/src` to `/usr/src/app` in the Docker container. This change improves organization but requires attention when mounting custom configuration files.

To use a custom configuration file with the Docker container, mount your `config.json` to the new location using:

```bash
docker run -it --rm --name webssh2 \
  -p 2222:2222 \
  -e DEBUG="webssh2*" \
  -v "$(pwd)/config.json:/usr/src/app/config.json" \
  billchurch/webssh2:bigip-server
```

Note: 
- If you previously mounted your configuration file to `/usr/src/config.json`, it will not be detected. The container will silently fall back to default configuration.
- The new location at `/usr/src/app/config.json` is the only valid path for custom configuration files.
- The default configuration provides basic functionality, so missing custom configurations may not be immediately apparent.

## Usage

Access the web client by navigating to:

```
http://localhost:2222/ssh
```

You'll be prompted for host details and SSH credentials.

Alternatively you may use the `/ssh/host/<host>` route:

```
http://localhost:2222/ssh/host/127.0.0.1
```

You'll be prompted for SSH credentials via HTTP Basic Authentication.
P
## Configuration

### GET Parameters

- `port=` - _integer_ - SSH server port (default: `22`)
- `header=` - _string_ - Optional header text
- `headerBackground=` - _string_ - Optional background color (default: `"green"`)
- `sshterm=` - _string_ - Terminal type for pty (default: xterm-color)

### Config File Options

Edit `config.json` to customize the following options:

- `listen.ip` - _string_ - IP address to listen on (default: `"127.0.0.1"`)
- `listen.port` - _integer_ - Port to listen on (default: `2222`)
- `http.origins` - _array_ - CORS origins for socket.io (default: `["*:*"]`)
- `user.name` - _string_ - Default SSH username (default: `null`)
- `user.password` - _string_ - Default SSH password (default: `null`)
- `ssh.host` - _string_ - Default SSH host (default: `null`)
- `user.privateKey` - _string_ - Default SSH private key (default: `null`)
- `ssh.port` - _integer_ - Default SSH port (default: `22`)
- `ssh.term` - _string_ - Terminal emulation (default: `"xterm-color"`)
- `ssh.readyTimeout` - _integer_ - SSH handshake timeout in ms (default: `20000`)
- `ssh.keepaliveInterval` - _integer_ - SSH keepalive interval in ms (default: `120000`)
- `ssh.keepaliveCountMax` - _integer_ - Max SSH keepalive packets (default: `10`)
- `ssh.disableInteractiveAuth` - _boolean_ - When set to `true`, prevents interactive authentication through the web interface. Users must use Basic Authentication via the `/ssh/host/<host>` route. (default: `false`)
- `ssh.algorithms.cipher` - _array_ - Supported cipher algorithms (default: `["aes128-ctr", "aes192-ctr", "aes256-ctr", "aes128-gcm", "aes128-gcm@openssh.com", "aes256-gcm", "aes256-gcm@openssh.com", "aes256-cbc"]`)
- `ssh.algorithms.compress` - _array_ - Supported compression methods (default: `["none", "zlib@openssh.com", "zlib"]`)
- `ssh.algorithms.hmac` - _array_ - Supported HMAC algorithms (default: `["hmac-sha2-256", "hmac-sha2-512", "hmac-sha1"]`)
- `ssh.algorithms.kex` - _array_ - Supported key exchange methods (default: `["ecdh-sha2-nistp256", "ecdh-sha2-nistp384", "ecdh-sha2-nistp521", "diffie-hellman-group-exchange-sha256", "diffie-hellman-group14-sha1"]`)
- `ssh.algorithms.serverHostKey` - _array_ - Supported host key types (default: `["ecdsa-sha2-nistp256", "ecdsa-sha2-nistp384", "ecdsa-sha2-nistp521", "ssh-rsa"]`)
- `header.text` - _string_ - Header text (default: `null`)
- `header.background` - _string_ - Header background color (default: `"green"`)
- `session.name` - _string_ - Session cookie name (default: `"webssh2.sid"`)
- `session.secret` - _string_ - Session secret key (default: `crypto.randomBytes(32).toString("hex")`)
- `options.challengeButton` - _boolean_ - Enable challenge button (default: `true`)
- `options.autoLog` - _boolean_ - Enable auto-logging (default: `false`)
- `options.allowReauth` - _boolean_ - Allow reauthentication (default: `true`)
- `options.allowReconnect` - _boolean_ - Allow reconnection (default: `true`)
- `options.allowReplay` - _boolean_ - Allow credential replay (default: `true`)

For detailed SSH algorithm configurations, refer to the full config file.

## Features

### Keyboard Interactive Authentication

Keyboard Interactive authentication provides a flexible way to handle various authentication scenarios, including multi-factor authentication.

#### How it works

1. When the SSH server requests Keyboard Interactive authentication, WebSSH2 can handle it in two ways:
   a) Automatically (default behavior)
   b) By prompting the user through the web interface

2. In automatic mode:
   - If all prompts contain the word "password" (case-insensitive), WebSSH2 will automatically respond using the password provided during the initial connection attempt.
   - If any prompt doesn't contain "password", all prompts will be forwarded to the web client for user input.

3. When prompts are sent to the web client:
   - A dialog box appears in the user's browser, displaying all prompts from the SSH server.
   - The user can input responses for each prompt.
   - Responses are sent back to the SSH server to complete the authentication process.

#### Configuration Options

You can customize the Keyboard Interactive authentication behavior using the following option in your `config.json`:

```json
{
  "ssh": {
    "alwaysSendKeyboardInteractivePrompts": false
  }
}
```

- `alwaysSendKeyboardInteractivePrompts` (boolean, default: false):
  - When set to `true`, all Keyboard Interactive prompts will always be sent to the web client, regardless of their content.
  - When set to `false` (default), WebSSH2 will attempt to automatically handle password prompts and only send non-password prompts to the web client.

#### Use Cases

1. **Simple Password Authentication**: 
   With default settings, if the SSH server uses Keyboard Interactive for password authentication, WebSSH2 will automatically handle it without additional user interaction.

2. **Multi-Factor Authentication**: 
   For SSH servers requiring additional factors (e.g., OTP), WebSSH2 will present prompts to the user through the web interface.

3. **Always Prompt User**: 
   By setting `alwaysSendKeyboardInteractivePrompts` to `true`, you can ensure that users always see and respond to all authentication prompts, which can be useful for security-sensitive environments or for debugging purposes.

#### Security Considerations

- The automatic password handling feature is designed for convenience but may not be suitable for high-security environments. Consider setting `alwaysSendKeyboardInteractivePrompts` to `true` if you want users to explicitly enter their credentials for each session.
- Ensure that your WebSSH2 installation uses HTTPS to protect the communication between the web browser and the WebSSH2 server.

For more information on SSH keyboard-interactive authentication, refer to [RFC 4256](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4256).

### SSH Private Key Authentication

WebSSH2 supports SSH private key authentication when using the `/ssh/host/` endpoint with a private key configured in the server settings.

#### Configuration

Private key authentication can only be configured through the `config.json` file:

```json
{
  "user": {
    "name": "myuser",
    "privateKey": "-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----\nYour-Private-Key-Here\n-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----",
    "password": "optional-fallback-password"
  }
}
```

#### Key Requirements

- Only `ssh-rsa` type keys are supported
- The private key must be in PEM format
- The key in `config.json` must be on a single line with `\n` as line separators
- Must include the appropriate header and footer:
  ```
  -----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----\n[... key content ...]\n-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
  ```

#### Generating a Private Key
To generate a new SSH private key, you can use the following command:

```bash
ssh-keygen -m PEM -t rsa -b 4096 -f ~/.ssh/id_rsa
```

#### Converting Your Private Key

To convert your existing SSH private key into the correct format for `config.json`, you can use this bash command:

```bash
echo '"'$(cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa | tr '\n' '~' | sed 's/~/\\n/g')'"'
```

This command:
1. Reads your private key file
2. Converts newlines to temporary characters
3. Replaces those characters with `\n`
4. Wraps the result in quotes
5. Outputs the key in a format ready to paste into your `config.json`

#### Authentication Process

1. When connecting through the `/ssh/host/` endpoint, WebSSH2 will first attempt to authenticate using the private key specified in `config.json`
2. If key authentication fails and `user.password` is configured, the system will automatically attempt password authentication
3. If both authentication methods fail, you'll receive an authentication error

#### Endpoint Support

- `/ssh/host/:host` - Supports private key authentication configured via `config.json`
- `/ssh` - Does NOT support private key authentication

#### Security Considerations

- Store private keys securely in your server configuration
- Use appropriate file permissions for your `config.json` file
- Consider using encrypted private keys for additional security
- Always use HTTPS when accessing the WebSSH2 service

#### Example Usage

1. Convert and configure your private key:
   ```bash
   # First, convert your key
   echo '"'$(cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa | tr '\n' '~' | sed 's/~/\\n/g')'"'
   
   # Copy the output and paste it into config.json
   ```

2. Configure `config.json`:
   ```json
   {
     "user": {
       "name": "myuser",
       "privateKey": "-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----\nMIIEpA...[rest of key]...Yh5Q==\n-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----",
       "password": "fallback-password"
     }
   }
   ```

3. Access the service via the `/ssh/host/` endpoint:
   ```
   https://your-server:2222/ssh/host/target-server
   ```

#### Troubleshooting

If key authentication fails, check:
- Key type is `ssh-rsa`
- Key format in `config.json` is properly escaped with `\n` line separators
- Key permissions on the target SSH server
- Server's `authorized_keys` file configuration
- SSH server logs for specific authentication failure reasons

For additional support or troubleshooting, please open an issue on the GitHub repository.

### Environment Variables via URL

WebSSH2 supports passing environment variables through URL parameters, allowing you to customize the SSH session environment. This feature enables scenarios like automatically opening specific files or setting custom environment variables.

#### Server Configuration

Before using this feature, you must configure your SSH server to accept the environment variables you want to pass. Edit your `/etc/ssh/sshd_config` file to include the desired variables in the `AcceptEnv` directive:

```bash
# Allow client to pass locale environment variables and custom vars
AcceptEnv LANG LC_* VIM_FILE CUSTOM_ENV
```

Remember to restart your SSH server after making changes:
```bash
sudo systemctl restart sshd  # For systemd-based systems
# or
sudo service sshd restart   # For init.d-based systems
```

#### Usage

Pass environment variables using the `env` query parameter:

```bash
# Single environment variable
http://localhost:2222/ssh/host/example.com?env=VIM_FILE:config.txt

# Multiple environment variables
http://localhost:2222/ssh/host/example.com?env=VIM_FILE:config.txt,CUSTOM_ENV:test
```

#### Security Considerations

To maintain security, environment variables must meet these criteria:

- Variable names must:
  - Start with a capital letter
  - Contain only uppercase letters, numbers, and underscores
  - Be listed in the SSH server's `AcceptEnv` directive
- Variable values cannot contain shell special characters (;, &, |, `, $)

Invalid environment variables will be silently ignored.

#### Example Usage

1. Configure your SSH server as shown above.

2. Create a URL with environment variables:
   ```
   http://localhost:2222/ssh/host/example.com?env=VIM_FILE:settings.conf,CUSTOM_ENV:production
   ```

3. In your remote server's `.bashrc` or shell initialization file:
   ```bash
   if [ ! -z "$VIM_FILE" ]; then
     vim "$VIM_FILE"
   fi

   if [ ! -z "$CUSTOM_ENV" ]; then
     echo "Running in $CUSTOM_ENV environment"
   fi
   ```

#### Troubleshooting

If environment variables aren't being set:

1. Verify the variables are permitted in `/etc/ssh/sshd_config`
2. Check SSH server logs for any related errors
3. Ensure variable names and values meet the security requirements
4. Test with a simple variable first to isolate any issues

## Routes

WebSSH2 provides two main routes:

### 1. `/ssh`

- **URL:** `http(s)://your-webssh2-server/ssh`
- **Features:** 
  - Interactive login form

    <img width="341" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/829d1776-3bc5-4315-b0c6-9e96a648ce06">
  - Terminal configuration options

    <img width="341" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bf60f5ba-7221-4177-8d64-946907aed5ff">

### 2. `/ssh/host/:host`

- **URL:** `http(s)://your-webssh2-server/ssh/host/:host`
- **Authentication:** HTTP Basic Auth
- **Features:** 
  - Quick connections to specific hosts
  - Optional `port` parameter (e.g., `?port=2222`)

## Client-Side Module
WebSSH2 uses a companion module called `webssh2_client` which provides the browser-side terminal interface and WebSocket communication layer.

### About webssh2_client

- **Repository**: [https://github.com/billchurch/webssh2_client](https://github.com/billchurch/webssh2_client)
- **Purpose**: Provides the browser-based terminal emulator and WebSocket client
- **Integration**: Automatically included as a dependency in package.json
- **Version**: The compatible version is managed through the package.json dependency

### Features

The client module provides:
- Terminal emulation using xterm.js
- WebSocket communication with the WebSSH2 server
- User interface for SSH connections
- Terminal configuration and customization
- Session management
- File transfer capabilities

### Client-Server Communication

The server integrates with the client module by:
1. Serving the client's static files from `/client/public`
2. Injecting server configuration into the client via `window.webssh2Config`
3. Managing WebSocket connections for terminal I/O
4. Handling authentication and session management

### Customization

More to follow...

## Tips

- For security, use HTTPS when transmitting credentials via HTTP Basic Auth.
- Terminal settings for `/ssh/host/:host` can be customized after login via `Menu | Settings` and persist across sessions.
- You can enable debug from the console by passing the `DEBUG` environment variable to your start script: `DEBUG=webssh*,-webssh2:ssh2 npm run start`. The `webssh2:ssh2` namespace is very chatty and shows all of the SSH protocol information, the `-webssh2:ssh2` excludes that namespace from the line above, otherwise `DEBUG=webssh*` will capture all of the WebSSH2 specific bits. You may also debug Socket.IO and Express related events with `engine`, `socket` and `express` namespaces, or go for broke and debug everything with `DEBUG=*`.
- For development information see [DEVELOPMENT.md](./DEVELOPMENT.md).

For more detailed information on configuration and usage, please refer to the full documentation or open an issue on GitHub.

## Support
If you like what I do, and want to support me you can [buy me a coffee](https://www.buymeacoffee.com/billchurch)!

[![Buy Me A Coffee](https://www.buymeacoffee.com/assets/img/custom_images/orange_img.png)](https://www.buymeacoffee.com/billchurch)

Commit message:

feat: passphrase encrypted private key authentication #382

README.md, after:

# WebSSH2 - Web SSH Client

![Orthrus Mascot](images/orthrus2.png)

WebSSH2 is an HTML5 web-based terminal emulator and SSH client. It uses SSH2 as a client on a host to proxy a Websocket / Socket.io connection to an SSH2 server.

![WebSSH2 demo](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1668075/182425293-acc8741e-cc92-4105-afdc-9538e1685d4b.gif)

![WebSSH2 Screenshot](images/Screenshot.png)

## Table of Contents

- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Breaking Changes](#breaking-changes)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Docker Setup](#docker-setup)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Features](#features)
- [Routes](#routes)
- [Client-Side Module](#client-side-module)
- [Tips](#tips)
- [Support](#support)

## Requirements

- Node.js 6.9.1

## Breaking Changes
- See [CONFIG.md](./CONFIG.md) for a list of breaking changes to the config.json file.
- See [DEPRECATED.md](./DEPRECATED.md) for a list of deprecated options.

## Installation

1. Clone the repository:
   ```
   git clone https://github.com/billchurch/webssh2.git
   cd webssh2
   ```

2. Install dependencies:
   ```
   npm install --production
   ```
   For development purposes, use `npm install` instead.

3. Configure the application by editing `config.json` if needed.

4. Start the server:
   ```
   npm start
   ```

## Docker Setup

1. Build and run the Docker container (with debug messages):
   ```bash
   docker build -t webssh2 .
   docker run --name webssh2 --rm -it -p 2222:2222 -e "DEBUG=webssh2*,-webssh2:ssh2" webssh2
   ```

### Important Note About Configuration Files

As of recent versions, the configuration file location has moved from `/usr/src` to `/usr/src/app` in the Docker container. This change improves organization but requires attention when mounting custom configuration files.

To use a custom configuration file with the Docker container, mount your `config.json` to the new location using:

```bash
docker run -it --rm --name webssh2 \
  -p 2222:2222 \
  -e DEBUG="webssh2*" \
  -v "$(pwd)/config.json:/usr/src/app/config.json" \
  billchurch/webssh2:bigip-server
```

Note: 
- If you previously mounted your configuration file to `/usr/src/config.json`, it will not be detected. The container will silently fall back to default configuration.
- The new location at `/usr/src/app/config.json` is the only valid path for custom configuration files.
- The default configuration provides basic functionality, so missing custom configurations may not be immediately apparent.

## Usage

Access the web client by navigating to:

```
http://localhost:2222/ssh
```

You'll be prompted for host details and SSH credentials.

Alternatively you may use the `/ssh/host/<host>` route:

```
http://localhost:2222/ssh/host/127.0.0.1
```

You'll be prompted for SSH credentials via HTTP Basic Authentication.
P
## Configuration

### GET Parameters

- `port=` - _integer_ - SSH server port (default: `22`)
- `header=` - _string_ - Optional header text
- `headerBackground=` - _string_ - Optional background color (default: `"green"`)
- `sshterm=` - _string_ - Terminal type for pty (default: xterm-color)

### Config File Options

Edit `config.json` to customize the following options:

- `listen.ip` - _string_ - IP address to listen on (default: `"127.0.0.1"`)
- `listen.port` - _integer_ - Port to listen on (default: `2222`)
- `http.origins` - _array_ - CORS origins for socket.io (default: `["*:*"]`)
- `user.name` - _string_ - Default SSH username (default: `null`)
- `user.password` - _string_ - Default SSH password (default: `null`)
- `ssh.host` - _string_ - Default SSH host (default: `null`)
- `user.privateKey` - _string_ - Default SSH private key (default: `null`)
- `ssh.port` - _integer_ - Default SSH port (default: `22`)
- `ssh.term` - _string_ - Terminal emulation (default: `"xterm-color"`)
- `ssh.readyTimeout` - _integer_ - SSH handshake timeout in ms (default: `20000`)
- `ssh.keepaliveInterval` - _integer_ - SSH keepalive interval in ms (default: `120000`)
- `ssh.keepaliveCountMax` - _integer_ - Max SSH keepalive packets (default: `10`)
- `ssh.disableInteractiveAuth` - _boolean_ - When set to `true`, prevents interactive authentication through the web interface. Users must use Basic Authentication via the `/ssh/host/<host>` route. (default: `false`)
- `ssh.algorithms.cipher` - _array_ - Supported cipher algorithms (default: `["aes128-ctr", "aes192-ctr", "aes256-ctr", "aes128-gcm", "aes128-gcm@openssh.com", "aes256-gcm", "aes256-gcm@openssh.com", "aes256-cbc"]`)
- `ssh.algorithms.compress` - _array_ - Supported compression methods (default: `["none", "zlib@openssh.com", "zlib"]`)
- `ssh.algorithms.hmac` - _array_ - Supported HMAC algorithms (default: `["hmac-sha2-256", "hmac-sha2-512", "hmac-sha1"]`)
- `ssh.algorithms.kex` - _array_ - Supported key exchange methods (default: `["ecdh-sha2-nistp256", "ecdh-sha2-nistp384", "ecdh-sha2-nistp521", "diffie-hellman-group-exchange-sha256", "diffie-hellman-group14-sha1"]`)
- `ssh.algorithms.serverHostKey` - _array_ - Supported host key types (default: `["ecdsa-sha2-nistp256", "ecdsa-sha2-nistp384", "ecdsa-sha2-nistp521", "ssh-rsa"]`)
- `header.text` - _string_ - Header text (default: `null`)
- `header.background` - _string_ - Header background color (default: `"green"`)
- `session.name` - _string_ - Session cookie name (default: `"webssh2.sid"`)
- `session.secret` - _string_ - Session secret key (default: `crypto.randomBytes(32).toString("hex")`)
- `options.challengeButton` - _boolean_ - Enable challenge button (default: `true`)
- `options.autoLog` - _boolean_ - Enable auto-logging (default: `false`)
- `options.allowReauth` - _boolean_ - Allow reauthentication (default: `true`)
- `options.allowReconnect` - _boolean_ - Allow reconnection (default: `true`)
- `options.allowReplay` - _boolean_ - Allow credential replay (default: `true`)

For detailed SSH algorithm configurations, refer to the full config file.

## Features

### Keyboard Interactive Authentication

Keyboard Interactive authentication provides a flexible way to handle various authentication scenarios, including multi-factor authentication.

#### How it works

1. When the SSH server requests Keyboard Interactive authentication, WebSSH2 can handle it in two ways:
   a) Automatically (default behavior)
   b) By prompting the user through the web interface

2. In automatic mode:
   - If all prompts contain the word "password" (case-insensitive), WebSSH2 will automatically respond using the password provided during the initial connection attempt.
   - If any prompt doesn't contain "password", all prompts will be forwarded to the web client for user input.

3. When prompts are sent to the web client:
   - A dialog box appears in the user's browser, displaying all prompts from the SSH server.
   - The user can input responses for each prompt.
   - Responses are sent back to the SSH server to complete the authentication process.

#### Configuration Options

You can customize the Keyboard Interactive authentication behavior using the following option in your `config.json`:

```json
{
  "ssh": {
    "alwaysSendKeyboardInteractivePrompts": false
  }
}
```

- `alwaysSendKeyboardInteractivePrompts` (boolean, default: false):
  - When set to `true`, all Keyboard Interactive prompts will always be sent to the web client, regardless of their content.
  - When set to `false` (default), WebSSH2 will attempt to automatically handle password prompts and only send non-password prompts to the web client.

#### Use Cases

1. **Simple Password Authentication**: 
   With default settings, if the SSH server uses Keyboard Interactive for password authentication, WebSSH2 will automatically handle it without additional user interaction.

2. **Multi-Factor Authentication**: 
   For SSH servers requiring additional factors (e.g., OTP), WebSSH2 will present prompts to the user through the web interface.

3. **Always Prompt User**: 
   By setting `alwaysSendKeyboardInteractivePrompts` to `true`, you can ensure that users always see and respond to all authentication prompts, which can be useful for security-sensitive environments or for debugging purposes.

#### Security Considerations

- The automatic password handling feature is designed for convenience but may not be suitable for high-security environments. Consider setting `alwaysSendKeyboardInteractivePrompts` to `true` if you want users to explicitly enter their credentials for each session.
- Ensure that your WebSSH2 installation uses HTTPS to protect the communication between the web browser and the WebSSH2 server.

For more information on SSH keyboard-interactive authentication, refer to [RFC 4256](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4256).

### SSH Private Key Authentication

WebSSH2 supports SSH private key authentication when using the `/ssh/host/` endpoint with a private key configured in the server settings or via the interactive method with the `/ssh/` endpoint. 

#### Configuration

Private key authentication can only be configured through the `config.json` file:

```json
{
  "user": {
    "name": "myuser",
    "privateKey": "-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----\nYour-Private-Key-Here\n-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----",
    "password": "optional-fallback-password"
  }
}
```

#### Key Requirements

- Only `ssh-rsa` type keys are supported
- Passphrase encryption is supported, and if used the `passphrase` must be provided
- The private key must be in PEM format
- The key in `config.json` must be on a single line with `\n` as line separators
- Must include the appropriate header and footer:
  ```
  -----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----\n[... key content ...]\n-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
  ```
  or for encrypted keys:
  ```
  -----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----\nProc-Type: 4,ENCRYPTED\nDEK-Info: AES-128-CBC,5930F19760F7FBBC865400940A89D954\n\n[... key content ...]\n-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
  ```
#### Generating a Private Key
To generate a new SSH private key, you can use the following command:

```bash
ssh-keygen -m PEM -t rsa -b 4096 -f ~/.ssh/id_rsa
```

#### Converting Your Private Key

Keys uploaded or pasted using the interactive mode through the `/ssh` endpoint can work as-is, however if using a key with `config.json` you must convert your existing SSH private key into the correct format (single line). A bash one-liner you can to accomplish this is:

```bash
echo '    "privateKey": "'$(cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa | tr '\n' '~' | sed 's/~/\\n/g')'"'
```

This command:
1. Reads your private key file
2. Converts newlines to temporary characters
3. Replaces those characters with `\n`
4. Wraps the result in quotes
5. Outputs the key in a format ready to paste into your `config.json`

#### Authentication Process

1. When connecting through the `/ssh/host/` endpoint, WebSSH2 will first attempt to authenticate using the private key specified in `config.json`
2. If key authentication fails and `user.password` is configured, the system will automatically attempt password authentication
3. If both authentication methods fail, you'll receive an authentication error

#### Endpoint Support

- `/ssh/host/:host` - Supports private key authentication configured via `config.json`
- `/ssh` - Does NOT support private key authentication

#### Security Considerations

- Store private keys securely in your server configuration
- Use appropriate file permissions for your `config.json` file
- Consider using encrypted private keys for additional security
- Always use HTTPS when accessing the WebSSH2 service

#### Example Usage

1. Convert and configure your private key:
   ```bash
   # First, convert your key
   echo '"'$(cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa | tr '\n' '~' | sed 's/~/\\n/g')'"'
   
   # Copy the output and paste it into config.json
   ```

2. Configure `config.json`:
   ```json
   {
     "user": {
       "name": "myuser",
       "privateKey": "-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----\nMIIEpA...[rest of key]...Yh5Q==\n-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----",
       "password": "fallback-password"
     }
   }
   ```

3. Access the service via the `/ssh/host/` endpoint:
   ```
   https://your-server:2222/ssh/host/target-server
   ```

#### Troubleshooting

If key authentication fails, check:
- Key type is `ssh-rsa`
- Key format in `config.json` is properly escaped with `\n` line separators
- Key permissions on the target SSH server
- Server's `authorized_keys` file configuration
- SSH server logs for specific authentication failure reasons

For additional support or troubleshooting, please open an issue on the GitHub repository.

### Environment Variables via URL

WebSSH2 supports passing environment variables through URL parameters, allowing you to customize the SSH session environment. This feature enables scenarios like automatically opening specific files or setting custom environment variables.

#### Server Configuration

Before using this feature, you must configure your SSH server to accept the environment variables you want to pass. Edit your `/etc/ssh/sshd_config` file to include the desired variables in the `AcceptEnv` directive:

```bash
# Allow client to pass locale environment variables and custom vars
AcceptEnv LANG LC_* VIM_FILE CUSTOM_ENV
```

Remember to restart your SSH server after making changes:
```bash
sudo systemctl restart sshd  # For systemd-based systems
# or
sudo service sshd restart   # For init.d-based systems
```

#### Usage

Pass environment variables using the `env` query parameter:

```bash
# Single environment variable
http://localhost:2222/ssh/host/example.com?env=VIM_FILE:config.txt

# Multiple environment variables
http://localhost:2222/ssh/host/example.com?env=VIM_FILE:config.txt,CUSTOM_ENV:test
```

#### Security Considerations

To maintain security, environment variables must meet these criteria:

- Variable names must:
  - Start with a capital letter
  - Contain only uppercase letters, numbers, and underscores
  - Be listed in the SSH server's `AcceptEnv` directive
- Variable values cannot contain shell special characters (;, &, |, `, $)

Invalid environment variables will be silently ignored.

#### Example Usage

1. Configure your SSH server as shown above.

2. Create a URL with environment variables:
   ```
   http://localhost:2222/ssh/host/example.com?env=VIM_FILE:settings.conf,CUSTOM_ENV:production
   ```

3. In your remote server's `.bashrc` or shell initialization file:
   ```bash
   if [ ! -z "$VIM_FILE" ]; then
     vim "$VIM_FILE"
   fi

   if [ ! -z "$CUSTOM_ENV" ]; then
     echo "Running in $CUSTOM_ENV environment"
   fi
   ```

#### Troubleshooting

If environment variables aren't being set:

1. Verify the variables are permitted in `/etc/ssh/sshd_config`
2. Check SSH server logs for any related errors
3. Ensure variable names and values meet the security requirements
4. Test with a simple variable first to isolate any issues

## Routes

WebSSH2 provides two main routes:

### 1. `/ssh`

- **URL:** `http(s)://your-webssh2-server/ssh`
- **Features:** 
  - Interactive login form

    <img width="341" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/829d1776-3bc5-4315-b0c6-9e96a648ce06">
  - Terminal configuration options

    <img width="341" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bf60f5ba-7221-4177-8d64-946907aed5ff">

### 2. `/ssh/host/:host`

- **URL:** `http(s)://your-webssh2-server/ssh/host/:host`
- **Authentication:** HTTP Basic Auth
- **Features:** 
  - Quick connections to specific hosts
  - Optional `port` parameter (e.g., `?port=2222`)

## Client-Side Module
WebSSH2 uses a companion module called `webssh2_client` which provides the browser-side terminal interface and WebSocket communication layer.

### About webssh2_client

- **Repository**: [https://github.com/billchurch/webssh2_client](https://github.com/billchurch/webssh2_client)
- **Purpose**: Provides the browser-based terminal emulator and WebSocket client
- **Integration**: Automatically included as a dependency in package.json
- **Version**: The compatible version is managed through the package.json dependency

### Features

The client module provides:
- Terminal emulation using xterm.js
- WebSocket communication with the WebSSH2 server
- User interface for SSH connections
- Terminal configuration and customization
- Session management
- File transfer capabilities

### Client-Server Communication

The server integrates with the client module by:
1. Serving the client's static files from `/client/public`
2. Injecting server configuration into the client via `window.webssh2Config`
3. Managing WebSocket connections for terminal I/O
4. Handling authentication and session management

### Customization

More to follow...

## Tips

- For security, use HTTPS when transmitting credentials via HTTP Basic Auth.
- Terminal settings for `/ssh/host/:host` can be customized after login via `Menu | Settings` and persist across sessions.
- You can enable debug from the console by passing the `DEBUG` environment variable to your start script: `DEBUG=webssh*,-webssh2:ssh2 npm run start`. The `webssh2:ssh2` namespace is very chatty and shows all of the SSH protocol information, the `-webssh2:ssh2` excludes that namespace from the line above, otherwise `DEBUG=webssh*` will capture all of the WebSSH2 specific bits. You may also debug Socket.IO and Express related events with `engine`, `socket` and `express` namespaces, or go for broke and debug everything with `DEBUG=*`.
- For development information see [DEVELOPMENT.md](./DEVELOPMENT.md).

For more detailed information on configuration and usage, please refer to the full documentation or open an issue on GitHub.

## Support
If you like what I do, and want to support me you can [buy me a coffee](https://www.buymeacoffee.com/billchurch)!

[![Buy Me A Coffee](https://www.buymeacoffee.com/assets/img/custom_images/orange_img.png)](https://www.buymeacoffee.com/billchurch)
