DOCS/development/SETUP.md, before:

# WebSSH2 Development Guide

This guide explains how to set up and run the WebSSH2 client and server components for development.

## Prerequisites

- Node.js 22 LTS (Jod)
- npm
- Git
- Two terminal windows/sessions

## Project Setup

1. Create a development directory and clone both repositories:

```bash
mkdir webssh2-dev
cd webssh2-dev

# Clone the client repository
git clone https://github.com/billchurch/webssh2_client.git

# Clone the server repository
git clone https://github.com/billchurch/webssh2.git webssh2_server
```

2. Install dependencies for both projects:

```bash
# Install client dependencies
cd webssh2_client
npm install

# Install server dependencies
cd ../webssh2_server
npm install
```

## Development Workflow

### Starting the Server Component

1. In your first terminal window, navigate to the server directory:

```bash
cd webssh2_server
```

2. Start the server in development mode:

```bash
npm run dev
```

This will:
- Start the WebSSH2 server on port `2222`
- Enable automatic reloading when server files change
- Allow CORS for the development client

### Starting the Client Component

1. In your second terminal window, navigate to the client directory:

```bash
cd webssh2_client
```

2. Start the client in development mode:

```bash
npm run dev
```

This will:
- Start a development server on port `3000`
- Run `NODE_ENV=development npm-run-all --parallel start watch:build`
- Watch for file changes and rebuild automatically
- Inject development configuration into the client HTML

The development configuration is automatically injected through webpack.common.js when `NODE_ENV=development`:

```javascript
webssh2Config: {
  socket: { 
    url: 'http://localhost:2222', 
    path: '/ssh/socket.io' 
  },
  ssh: { 
    port: 22 
  }
}
```

### Accessing the Development Environment

1. Open your web browser and navigate to:
```
http://localhost:3000
```

2. The client will automatically connect to the development server at `localhost:2222`

## Development Architecture

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Browser as Browser<br/>(localhost:3000)
    participant Client as WebSSH2 Client<br/>(Port 3000)
    participant Server as WebSSH2 Server<br/>(Port 2222)
    participant SSH as SSH Server<br/>(Port 22)

    Note over Browser,SSH: Development Data Flow
    
    Browser->>+Client: HTTP Request
    Client->>-Browser: Serve Client Files
    
    Browser->>+Client: WebSocket Connection
    Client->>+Server: Socket.IO Connection
    Server->>+SSH: SSH Connection
    
    Note over Browser,SSH: Bidirectional Communication
    
    SSH-->>-Server: SSH Data
    Server-->>-Client: Socket.IO Events
    Client-->>-Browser: WebSocket Events
```

## File Watching and Auto-Reload

Both client and server components support file watching and automatic reloading:

- Client changes will trigger webpack to rebuild
- Server changes will trigger nodemon to restart

## Important Notes

1. The server and client components must use Socket.IO v2.2.0 for compatibility
2. Client development server (3000) and WebSSH2 server (2222) must run simultaneously
3. CORS is automatically handled in development mode
4. The development configuration is only injected in development mode

## Troubleshooting

If you encounter issues:

1. Ensure both servers are running (`npm run dev` in both directories)
2. Check the browser console for client-side errors
3. Check terminal output for server-side errors
4. Verify the ports (3000 and 2222) are available
5. Clear browser cache if changes aren't reflecting

## Building for Production (client)

When ready to build for production:

```bash
cd webssh2_client
npm run build
```

This will create production-ready files in the `client/public` directory without the development configuration injection.

Commit message:

Improve release artifacts and add ephemeral session store (#427)
* fix: package reproducible release artifact

* fix: make postinstall optional for prebuilt bundle

* docs: clarify container install flow

* feat: add ephemeral session store

Add an in-process store that mirrors MemoryStore without the production warning, document the ephemeral-only behaviour, and update npm scripts so check runs all tests.

* Refine release tooling and lint coverage

* fix: address sonar lint warnings

DOCS/development/SETUP.md, after:

# WebSSH2 Development Guide

This guide explains how to set up and run the WebSSH2 client and server components for development.

## Prerequisites

- Node.js 22 LTS (Jod)
- npm
- Git
- Two terminal windows/sessions

## Project Setup

1. Create a development directory and clone both repositories:

```bash
mkdir webssh2-dev
cd webssh2-dev

# Clone the client repository
git clone https://github.com/billchurch/webssh2_client.git

# Clone the server repository
git clone https://github.com/billchurch/webssh2.git webssh2_server
```

2. Install dependencies for both projects:

```bash
# Install client dependencies
cd webssh2_client
npm install

# Install server dependencies
cd ../webssh2_server
npm install
```

## Development Workflow

### Starting the Server Component

1. In your first terminal window, navigate to the server directory:

```bash
cd webssh2_server
```

2. Start the server in development mode:

```bash
npm run dev
```

This will:
- Start the WebSSH2 server on port `2222`
- Enable automatic reloading when server files change
- Allow CORS for the development client

### Starting the Client Component

1. In your second terminal window, navigate to the client directory:

```bash
cd webssh2_client
```

2. Start the client in development mode:

```bash
npm run dev
```

This will:
- Start a development server on port `3000`
- Run `NODE_ENV=development npm-run-all --parallel start watch:build`
- Watch for file changes and rebuild automatically
- Inject development configuration into the client HTML

The development configuration is automatically injected through webpack.common.js when `NODE_ENV=development`:

```javascript
webssh2Config: {
  socket: { 
    url: 'http://localhost:2222', 
    path: '/ssh/socket.io' 
  },
  ssh: { 
    port: 22 
  }
}
```

### Accessing the Development Environment

1. Open your web browser and navigate to:
```
http://localhost:3000
```

2. The client will automatically connect to the development server at `localhost:2222`

## Development Architecture

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant Browser as Browser<br/>(localhost:3000)
    participant Client as WebSSH2 Client<br/>(Port 3000)
    participant Server as WebSSH2 Server<br/>(Port 2222)
    participant SSH as SSH Server<br/>(Port 22)

    Note over Browser,SSH: Development Data Flow
    
    Browser->>+Client: HTTP Request
    Client->>-Browser: Serve Client Files
    
    Browser->>+Client: WebSocket Connection
    Client->>+Server: Socket.IO Connection
    Server->>+SSH: SSH Connection
    
    Note over Browser,SSH: Bidirectional Communication
    
    SSH-->>-Server: SSH Data
    Server-->>-Client: Socket.IO Events
    Client-->>-Browser: WebSocket Events
```

## File Watching and Auto-Reload

Both client and server components support file watching and automatic reloading:

- Client changes will trigger webpack to rebuild
- Server changes will trigger nodemon to restart

## Important Notes

1. The server and client components must use Socket.IO v2.2.0 for compatibility
2. Client development server (3000) and WebSSH2 server (2222) must run simultaneously
3. CORS is automatically handled in development mode
4. The development configuration is only injected in development mode
5. Session data uses the in-process `createEphemeralSessionStore`, which intentionally keeps sessions ephemeral—this aligns with SSH lifecycle expectations, but replace it with a durable store if you ever need persistence across restarts

### Session storage behaviour

The server wraps `express-session` with `createEphemeralSessionStore`, which mirrors the default memory store without triggering the production warning. Because SSH connections are short-lived and the process itself is treated as disposable, this design is intentional: session state is lost when the process exits. If you deploy in an environment where processes recycle frequently and you need resumable sessions, swap the store implementation for a durable backend (for example Redis) and configure it via the session middleware.

## Troubleshooting

If you encounter issues:

1. Ensure both servers are running (`npm run dev` in both directories)
2. Check the browser console for client-side errors
3. Check terminal output for server-side errors
4. Verify the ports (3000 and 2222) are available
5. Clear browser cache if changes aren't reflecting

## Building for Production (client)

When ready to build for production:

```bash
cd webssh2_client
npm run build
```

This will create production-ready files in the `client/public` directory without the development configuration injection.
