DOCS/api/WEBSOCKET-API.md, before:

# WebSSH2 Server API Documentation

## Overview

The WebSSH2 server provides a WebSocket interface for establishing SSH connections. This API documentation outlines the events and data structures used for communication between the client and the server.

Currently this implementation requires Socket.IO v2.2.0 due to this instance targeting node 6.9.1 for a legacy project. Future releases will not have this limitation.

## Connection

The server uses Socket.IO for real-time communication. Connect to the WebSocket server at the same host and port as the HTTP server, with the path `/ssh/socket.io`.

## Events

### Server to Client Events

1. `authentication`
   - Emitted to request authentication or provide authentication results.
   - Payload:
     ```javascript
     {
       action: string, // "request_auth" or "auth_result"
       success?: boolean, // Only present for "auth_result"
       message?: string // Error message if authentication fails
     }
     ```

2. `permissions`
   - Emitted after successful authentication to provide allowed actions.
   - Payload:
     ```javascript
     {
       autoLog: boolean,
       allowReplay: boolean,
       allowReconnect: boolean,
       allowReauth: boolean
     }
     ```

3. `getTerminal`
   - Emitted to request terminal specifications from the client.
   - Payload: `true`

4. `data`
   - Emitted when there's output from the SSH session.
   - Payload: `string` (UTF-8 encoded terminal output)

5. `ssherror`
   - Emitted when an SSH-related error occurs.
   - Payload: `string` (Error message)

6. `updateUI`
   - Emitted to update specific UI elements.
   - Payload:
     ```javascript
     {
       element: string, // UI element identifier
       value: any // New value for the element
     }
     ```

### Client to Server Events

1. `authenticate`
   - Emit this event to provide authentication credentials.
   - Payload:
     ```javascript
     {
       username: string,
       password: string,
       host: string,
       port: number,
       term?: string, // Optional terminal type
       cols?: number, // Optional terminal columns (added for early dimension setup)
       rows?: number  // Optional terminal rows (added for early dimension setup)
     }
     ```

2. `terminal`
   - Emit this event to provide terminal dimensions.
   - Payload:
     ```javascript
     {
       cols: number,
       rows: number
     }
     ```
   - Note: Terminal type (`term`) is managed server-side based on authentication parameters or server configuration.

3. `data`
   - Emit this event to send user input to the SSH session.
   - Payload: `string` (UTF-8 encoded user input)

4. `resize`
   - Emit this event when the terminal size changes.
   - Payload:
     ```javascript
     {
       cols: number,
       rows: number
     }
     ```

5. `control`
   - Emit this event for special control commands.
   - Payload: `string` ("replayCredentials" or "reauth")

6. `disconnect`
   - Emit this event to close the connection.
   - No payload required

## Authentication Flow

1. The server emits `authentication` with `action: "request_auth"`.
2. The client emits `authenticate` with credentials.
3. The server may emit `authentication` with `action: "keyboard-interactive"` for additional authentication steps.
4. The server emits `authentication` with `action: "auth_result"` and `success: true/false`.

## Establishing SSH Session

1. After successful authentication, the server emits `getTerminal`.
2. The client emits `terminal` with terminal dimensions (cols/rows only).
3. The server uses terminal type from authentication parameters or server defaults.
4. The server establishes the SSH connection and starts emitting `data` events with terminal output.
5. The client can now send `data` events with user input.

## Error Handling

- The client should listen for `ssherror` events and handle them appropriately (e.g., displaying error messages to the user).

## UI Updates

- The client should listen for `updateUI` events and update the corresponding UI elements.

## Best Practices

1. Handle connection errors and implement reconnection logic.
2. Implement proper error handling and user feedback.
3. Securely manage authentication credentials.
4. Handle terminal resizing appropriately.
5. Implement support for special control commands (replay credentials, reauthentication).

Commit message:

feat: add server-side generic prompt interface (#465)
* feat: add server-side generic prompt interface fixes #464

Implement unified prompt system for sending input, confirm, notice,
and toast prompts to clients via Socket.IO with acknowledgements.

- Add PromptId branded type and prompt payload interfaces
- Create pure prompt handler functions for each prompt type
- Add response validation with HTML injection prevention
- Implement socket-prompt tracking for secure response binding
- Migrate keyboard-interactive auth to unified prompt system
- Add unit tests for handlers, validators, and tracker

* fix: keyboard-interactive auth multi-round and prompt forwarding

- First round auto-answers only if ALL prompts contain "password"
- Subsequent rounds always forwarded to client for 2FA/MFA support
- Add forwardAllKeyboardInteractivePrompts per-session option
- Add KeyboardInteractiveHandler callback to SSH config
- Rename PromptInput.key→id, defaultValue→value for consistency
- Update icon names to PascalCase for lucide-solid compatibility

* chore: update devDependencies to latest versions

* feat: update webssh2_client to 2.4.1

* fix: add NOSONAR comments for clarity in prompt input types and validation tests

* chore: add NOSONAR comment for clarity in password constant

DOCS/api/WEBSOCKET-API.md, after:

# WebSSH2 Server API Documentation

## Overview

The WebSSH2 server provides a WebSocket interface for establishing SSH connections. This API documentation outlines the events and data structures used for communication between the client and the server.

Currently this implementation requires Socket.IO v2.2.0 due to this instance targeting node 6.9.1 for a legacy project. Future releases will not have this limitation.

## Connection

The server uses Socket.IO for real-time communication. Connect to the WebSocket server at the same host and port as the HTTP server, with the path `/ssh/socket.io`.

## Events

### Server to Client Events

1. `authentication`
   - Emitted to request authentication or provide authentication results.
   - Payload:
     ```javascript
     {
       action: string, // "request_auth" or "auth_result"
       success?: boolean, // Only present for "auth_result"
       message?: string // Error message if authentication fails
     }
     ```

2. `permissions`
   - Emitted after successful authentication to provide allowed actions.
   - Payload:
     ```javascript
     {
       autoLog: boolean,
       allowReplay: boolean,
       allowReconnect: boolean,
       allowReauth: boolean
     }
     ```

3. `getTerminal`
   - Emitted to request terminal specifications from the client.
   - Payload: `true`

4. `data`
   - Emitted when there's output from the SSH session.
   - Payload: `string` (UTF-8 encoded terminal output)

5. `ssherror`
   - Emitted when an SSH-related error occurs.
   - Payload: `string` (Error message)

6. `updateUI`
   - Emitted to update specific UI elements.
   - Payload:
     ```javascript
     {
       element: string, // UI element identifier
       value: any // New value for the element
     }
     ```

### Client to Server Events

1. `authenticate`
   - Emit this event to provide authentication credentials.
   - Payload:
     ```javascript
     {
       username: string,
       password: string,
       host: string,
       port: number,
       term?: string, // Optional terminal type
       cols?: number, // Optional terminal columns (added for early dimension setup)
       rows?: number, // Optional terminal rows (added for early dimension setup)
       forwardAllKeyboardInteractivePrompts?: boolean // When true, all keyboard-interactive prompts are forwarded to client
     }
     ```
   - The `forwardAllKeyboardInteractivePrompts` option bypasses the automatic password handling for keyboard-interactive auth. When set to `true`, all prompts (including password prompts) will be forwarded to the client for user input. This is useful for debugging or when explicit user interaction is required.

2. `terminal`
   - Emit this event to provide terminal dimensions.
   - Payload:
     ```javascript
     {
       cols: number,
       rows: number
     }
     ```
   - Note: Terminal type (`term`) is managed server-side based on authentication parameters or server configuration.

3. `data`
   - Emit this event to send user input to the SSH session.
   - Payload: `string` (UTF-8 encoded user input)

4. `resize`
   - Emit this event when the terminal size changes.
   - Payload:
     ```javascript
     {
       cols: number,
       rows: number
     }
     ```

5. `control`
   - Emit this event for special control commands.
   - Payload: `string` ("replayCredentials" or "reauth")

6. `disconnect`
   - Emit this event to close the connection.
   - No payload required

## Authentication Flow

1. The server emits `authentication` with `action: "request_auth"`.
2. The client emits `authenticate` with credentials.
3. For keyboard-interactive authentication, the server may emit multiple `prompt` events:
   - Each prompt contains fields for user input (password or text fields)
   - The client should display these prompts and collect user responses
   - The client responds via `prompt-response` with the user's answers
   - This loop continues until authentication completes
4. The server emits `authentication` with `action: "auth_result"` and `success: true/false`.

### Keyboard-Interactive Behavior

By default:
- **First round**: If all prompts contain "password", the server auto-responds with the stored password
- **Subsequent rounds**: All prompts are forwarded to the client (e.g., 2FA verification codes)

This behavior can be overridden:
- Set `forwardAllKeyboardInteractivePrompts: true` in the authenticate payload to forward all prompts
- Or configure `alwaysSendKeyboardInteractivePrompts: true` on the server

## Establishing SSH Session

1. After successful authentication, the server emits `getTerminal`.
2. The client emits `terminal` with terminal dimensions (cols/rows only).
3. The server uses terminal type from authentication parameters or server defaults.
4. The server establishes the SSH connection and starts emitting `data` events with terminal output.
5. The client can now send `data` events with user input.

## Error Handling

- The client should listen for `ssherror` events and handle them appropriately (e.g., displaying error messages to the user).

## UI Updates

- The client should listen for `updateUI` events and update the corresponding UI elements.

## Best Practices

1. Handle connection errors and implement reconnection logic.
2. Implement proper error handling and user feedback.
3. Securely manage authentication credentials.
4. Handle terminal resizing appropriately.
5. Implement support for special control commands (replay credentials, reauthentication).
