DOCS/BUILD.md, before:

# Build & Packaging Guide

This guide documents the supported build flows and the reproducible release artifact
produced by WebSSH2.

## Development Builds

Use the standard npm scripts when iterating locally:

```bash
npm ci
npm run dev
npm run build
```

These commands operate directly on the TypeScript sources in the repository and mirror
the behaviour of the previous tooling.

## Release Artifact Pipeline

Releases publish a tarball that contains only the files required to run WebSSH2 in production:

1. Install dependencies without development packages.
   ```bash
   npm ci --omit=dev
   ```
2. Compile the TypeScript project.
   ```bash
   npm run build
   ```
3. Package the reproducible artifact.
   ```bash
   node dist/scripts/create-release-artifact.js
   ```

Release tags are generated by release-please and use the
`webssh2-server-v<version>` naming convention.

The packaging script requires GNU tar on the system `PATH`. The script stages the
following files in a deterministic archive:

- `dist/` – compiled JavaScript and type definitions
- `package.json` and `package-lock.json`
- `scripts/postinstall.js` and `scripts/prestart.js`
- `manifest.json` – metadata about the build

The script writes the outputs to `release-artifacts/` (override with
`RELEASE_ARTIFACT_DIR`). It also emits a SHA-256 checksum file alongside the tarball.

### Manifest Format

`manifest.json` contains:

```json
{
  "version": "x.y.z",
  "gitSha": "<full commit sha>",
  "buildTime": "<ISO 8601 timestamp>",
  "distSha256": "<sha256 of staged dist/>"
}
```

Use the manifest together with the `.sha256` checksum to verify the artifact before deploying.

## Validating a Release Artifact

To test a packaged release locally:

```bash
tar -xzf webssh2-<version>.tar.gz -C ./test-release
cd ./test-release
npm ci --omit=dev
NODE_ENV=production npm start
```

The `prestart` script detects that `tsconfig.build.json` is absent and skips
rebuilding, launching the compiled server from `dist/index.js`.

## CI Integration Checklist

- GNU tar available on the runner (`tar --version` prints "GNU tar")
- `npm ci --omit=dev` succeeds before building
- `node dist/scripts/create-release-artifact.js` runs after compilation
- Upload both the tarball and its `.sha256` file to the release

Commit message:

fix: make postinstall optional for prebuilt bundle

DOCS/BUILD.md, after:

# Build & Packaging Guide

This guide documents the supported build flows and the reproducible release artifact
produced by WebSSH2.

## Development Builds

Use the standard npm scripts when iterating locally:

```bash
npm ci
npm run dev
npm run build
```

These commands operate directly on the TypeScript sources in the repository and mirror
the behaviour of the previous tooling.

## Release Artifact Pipeline

Releases publish a tarball that contains only the files required to run WebSSH2 in production:

1. Install dependencies without development packages.
   ```bash
   npm ci --omit=dev
   ```
2. Compile the TypeScript project.
   ```bash
   npm run build
   ```
3. Package the reproducible artifact.
   ```bash
   node dist/scripts/create-release-artifact.js
   ```

Release tags are generated by release-please and use the
`webssh2-server-v<version>` naming convention.

> **Note:** If you install dependencies with `--ignore-scripts`, run
> `npm run prepare:runtime` before packaging to ensure optional native modules are
> installed when needed.

The packaging script requires GNU tar on the system `PATH`. The script stages the
following files in a deterministic archive:

- `dist/` – compiled JavaScript and type definitions
- `package.json` and `package-lock.json`
- `scripts/postinstall.js` and `scripts/prestart.js`
- `manifest.json` – metadata about the build

The script writes the outputs to `release-artifacts/` (override with
`RELEASE_ARTIFACT_DIR`). It also emits a SHA-256 checksum file alongside the tarball.

### Manifest Format

`manifest.json` contains:

```json
{
  "version": "x.y.z",
  "gitSha": "<full commit sha>",
  "buildTime": "<ISO 8601 timestamp>",
  "distSha256": "<sha256 of staged dist/>"
}
```

Use the manifest together with the `.sha256` checksum to verify the artifact before deploying.

## Validating a Release Artifact

To test a packaged release locally:

```bash
tar -xzf webssh2-<version>.tar.gz -C ./test-release
cd ./test-release
npm ci --omit=dev
NODE_ENV=production npm start
```

The `prestart` script detects that `tsconfig.build.json` is absent and skips
rebuilding, launching the compiled server from `dist/index.js`.

## CI Integration Checklist

- GNU tar available on the runner (`tar --version` prints "GNU tar")
- `npm ci --omit=dev` succeeds before building
- `node dist/scripts/create-release-artifact.js` runs after compilation
- Upload both the tarball and its `.sha256` file to the release
