DOCS/configuration/ENVIRONMENT-VARIABLES.md, before:

# WebSSH2 Environment Variables

WebSSH2 supports comprehensive configuration through environment variables, following the [12-Factor App](https://12factor.net/config) methodology. This makes it ideal for Docker containers, Kubernetes deployments, and cloud-native applications.

## Configuration Priority

Configuration is loaded with the following priority (highest to lowest):

1. **Environment Variables** (highest priority)
2. `config.json` file
3. Built-in defaults (lowest priority)

## Environment Variable Format

All WebSSH2 environment variables use the `WEBSSH2_` prefix with underscore-delimited paths:

```bash
WEBSSH2_<SECTION>_<SETTING>=value
```

### Examples

```bash
WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT=3000
WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST=example.com
WEBSSH2_HEADER_TEXT="Production Environment"
```

## Complete Environment Variable Reference

### Server Configuration

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_LISTEN_IP` | string | `0.0.0.0` | IP address to bind the server to |
| `WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT` | number | `2222` | Port number for the web server |
| `PORT` | number | `2222` | Legacy port variable (use WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT) |

### HTTP Configuration

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_HTTP_ORIGINS` | array | `["*:*"]` | CORS allowed origins (comma-separated or JSON) |

#### Array Format Examples

```bash
# Comma-separated format
WEBSSH2_HTTP_ORIGINS="localhost:3000,*.example.com,api.test.com"

# JSON array format
WEBSSH2_HTTP_ORIGINS='["localhost:3000","*.example.com","api.test.com"]'
```

### Security Headers & CSP

The server applies security headers and a Content Security Policy (CSP) by default.

- Configuration: Defined in code at `app/security-headers.js` and applied by `app/middleware.js`.
- Environment variables: There are currently no `WEBSSH2_` environment variables to toggle or customize CSP/headers.
- Customization options:
  - Edit `CSP_CONFIG` and `SECURITY_HEADERS` in `app/security-headers.js` for global changes.
  - Use `createCSPMiddleware(customCSP)` for route-specific CSP overrides.
  - HSTS (`Strict-Transport-Security`) is only added on HTTPS requests.

### User Defaults

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_USER_NAME` | string | `null` | Default username for SSH connections |
| `WEBSSH2_USER_PASSWORD` | string | `null` | Default password for SSH connections |
| `WEBSSH2_USER_PRIVATE_KEY` | string | `null` | Default private key (base64 encoded or file path) |
| `WEBSSH2_USER_PASSPHRASE` | string | `null` | Passphrase for encrypted private keys |

### SSH Configuration

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST` | string | `null` | Default SSH host to connect to |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_PORT` | number | `22` | Default SSH port |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_LOCAL_ADDRESS` | string | `null` | Local address for SSH connections |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_LOCAL_PORT` | number | `null` | Local port for SSH connections |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_TERM` | string | `xterm-color` | Terminal type |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_READY_TIMEOUT` | number | `20000` | Connection ready timeout (ms) |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_KEEPALIVE_INTERVAL` | number | `120000` | Keep-alive interval (ms) |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_KEEPALIVE_COUNT_MAX` | number | `10` | Maximum keep-alive count |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS` | array | `[]` | Allowed subnets - IPv4/IPv6 CIDR notation (comma-separated) |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALWAYS_SEND_KEYBOARD_INTERACTIVE` | boolean | `false` | Always send keyboard-interactive prompts to client |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_DISABLE_INTERACTIVE_AUTH` | boolean | `false` | Disable interactive authentication |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ENV_ALLOWLIST` | array | `[]` | Only these environment variable names are forwarded to SSH (comma-separated or JSON). Caps: max 50 pairs; key length ≤ 32; value length ≤ 512. |

### SSH Subnet Restrictions

The `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS` variable enables network access control by restricting SSH connections to specific IP subnets. When configured, only hosts within the specified subnets can be accessed.

#### Features

- **IPv4 Support**: Full CIDR notation (/0 to /32), exact IPs, and wildcards
- **IPv6 Support**: Full CIDR notation (/0 to /128) and exact IPs
- **Mixed Networks**: Configure both IPv4 and IPv6 subnets together
- **DNS Resolution**: Hostnames are resolved and validated against allowed subnets

#### Subnet Format Examples

```bash
# IPv4 CIDR notation
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="192.168.1.0/24,10.0.0.0/8"

# IPv6 CIDR notation
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="2001:db8::/32,fe80::/10"

# Mixed IPv4 and IPv6
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="127.0.0.0/8,::1/128"

# Exact IP addresses
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="192.168.1.100,2001:db8::1"

# IPv4 wildcards (IPv4 only)
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="192.168.*.*,10.0.1.*"

# Complex example with all formats
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="10.0.0.0/8,192.168.1.100,172.16.*.*,::1/128,2001:db8::/32"
```

#### Common Use Cases

```bash
# Allow only localhost connections (IPv4 and IPv6)
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="127.0.0.0/8,::1/128"

# Allow only private networks (RFC 1918 + RFC 4193)
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="10.0.0.0/8,172.16.0.0/12,192.168.0.0/16,fc00::/7"

# Allow specific office network
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="203.0.113.0/24,2001:db8:1234::/48"
```

#### Important Notes

- When no subnets are specified, all connections are allowed (default behavior)
- Hostnames are resolved to IP addresses before validation
- If a hostname resolves to multiple IPs, connection is allowed if any IP matches
- Connection is blocked before SSH authentication if host is not in allowed subnets

### SSH Algorithms

You can configure SSH algorithms in two ways:

#### Option 1: Algorithm Preset (Recommended)

| Variable | Values | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_PRESET` | `modern`, `legacy`, `strict` | Use predefined algorithm sets |

**Preset Details:**

- **`modern`**: Strong algorithms for contemporary systems
- **`legacy`**: Compatible with older SSH implementations  
- **`strict`**: Only the most secure algorithms

#### Option 2: Individual Algorithm Arrays

| Variable | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_CIPHER` | array | Encryption algorithms |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_KEX` | array | Key exchange algorithms |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_HMAC` | array | MAC algorithms |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_COMPRESS` | array | Compression algorithms |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_SERVER_HOST_KEY` | array | Server host key algorithms |

#### Algorithm Examples

```bash
# Using preset (recommended)
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_PRESET=modern

# Using individual arrays
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_CIPHER="aes256-gcm@openssh.com,aes128-gcm@openssh.com"
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_KEX="ecdh-sha2-nistp256,ecdh-sha2-nistp384"
```

### Web Interface

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_HEADER_TEXT` | string | `null` | Header text in web interface |
| `WEBSSH2_HEADER_BACKGROUND` | string | `green` | Header background color |

### Logging

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_FORMAT` | string | `json` | Structured log output format (`json` only at present) |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_LEVEL` | string | `info` | Global minimum log level (`debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error`) |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_STDOUT_ENABLED` | boolean | `true` | Enables stdout transport when `true` |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_STDOUT_MIN_LEVEL` | string | `info` | Per-transport minimum level for stdout delivery |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_ENABLED` | boolean | `false` | Enables RFC 5424/TLS syslog forwarding |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_HOST` | string | `null` | Syslog collector hostname or IP |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_PORT` | number | `6514` | Syslog collector port (TLS default) |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_APP_NAME` | string | `webssh2` | Syslog `APP-NAME` field |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_ENTERPRISE_ID` | number | `32473` | Enterprise ID for structured data (`webssh2@<ID>`) |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_TLS_ENABLED` | boolean | `true` | Enables TLS transport as per RFC 5425 |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_TLS_CA_FILE` | string | `null` | Path to CA bundle when TLS is enabled |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_TLS_CERT_FILE` | string | `null` | Path to client certificate for mutual TLS |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_TLS_KEY_FILE` | string | `null` | Path to private key paired with client cert |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_TLS_REJECT_UNAUTHORIZED` | boolean | `true` | Reject syslog server certificates failing validation |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_BUFFER_SIZE` | number | `1000` | Maximum in-memory message backlog before drop |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_FLUSH_INTERVAL_MS` | number | `1000` | Flush cadence for buffered syslog messages |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_INCLUDE_JSON` | boolean | `false` | Attach JSON payload after syslog structured data |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SAMPLING_DEFAULT_RATE` | number | `1` | Default probability (0-1) for emitting sampled events |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SAMPLING_RULES` | string | `null` | JSON array of sampling overrides (`[{"target":"*","sampleRate":0.25}]`) |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_RATE_LIMIT_RULES` | string | `null` | JSON describing token-bucket rules (`[{"target":"ssh_command","limit":5,"intervalMs":1000,"burst":5}]`) |

> **Note:** Wrap complex JSON values (such as `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_RATE_LIMIT_RULES` or `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SAMPLING_RULES`) in single quotes to prevent shell interpolation. Sampling rules can be supplied via `config.json` for richer targeting (per-event overrides).

## Quick Start Examples

Set common settings using environment variables (preferred):

```bash
# Listen on port 2222 and allow all origins during development
WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT=2222 \
WEBSSH2_HTTP_ORIGINS="*:*" \

# Default SSH target
WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST=ssh.example.com \
WEBSSH2_SSH_PORT=22 \
WEBSSH2_SSH_TERM=xterm-256color \

# UI header
WEBSSH2_HEADER_TEXT="WebSSH2" \
WEBSSH2_HEADER_BACKGROUND=green \

# Behavior options
WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_ALLOW_RECONNECT=true \
WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_ALLOW_REAUTH=true \
WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_ALLOW_REPLAY=true \

# Security: algorithms preset
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_PRESET=modern
```

Examples with Docker (inline `-e` flags):

```bash
docker run --name webssh2 --rm -it \
  -p 2222:2222 \
  -e WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT=2222 \
  -e WEBSSH2_HTTP_ORIGINS="*:*" \
  -e WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST=ssh.example.com \
  -e WEBSSH2_SSH_PORT=22 \
  -e WEBSSH2_HEADER_TEXT="WebSSH2" \
  -e WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_PRESET=modern \
  webssh2
```

### Application Options

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_CHALLENGE_BUTTON` | boolean | `true` | Show challenge button |
| `WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_AUTO_LOG` | boolean | `false` | Enable automatic logging |
| `WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_ALLOW_REAUTH` | boolean | `true` | Allow reauthentication |
| `WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_ALLOW_RECONNECT` | boolean | `true` | Allow reconnection |
| `WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_ALLOW_REPLAY` | boolean | `true` | Allow session replay |
| `WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_REPLAY_CRLF` | boolean | `false` | Send CRLF for credential replay (default is CR) |

### Session Management

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_SESSION_SECRET` | string | auto-generated | Session encryption secret |
| `WEBSSH2_SESSION_NAME` | string | `webssh2.sid` | Session cookie name |

## Data Type Formats

### Boolean Values

Use `true`/`false` or `1`/`0`:

```bash
WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_AUTO_LOG=true
WEBSSH2_SSH_DISABLE_INTERACTIVE_AUTH=false
```

### Array Values

Two formats supported:

**Comma-separated (simple values):**

```bash
WEBSSH2_HTTP_ORIGINS="localhost:3000,*.example.com"
```

**JSON array (complex values or special characters):**

```bash
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_CIPHER='["aes256-gcm@openssh.com","aes128-ctr"]'
```

### Null Values

Use empty string or `null`:

```bash
WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST=
WEBSSH2_USER_NAME=null
```

## Docker Examples

### Basic Docker Run

```bash
docker run -d \
  -p 2222:2222 \
  -e WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST=ssh.example.com \
  -e WEBSSH2_HEADER_TEXT="Production SSH" \
  -e WEBSSH2_HEADER_BACKGROUND=red \
  -e WEBSSH2_SESSION_SECRET=your-secret-key \
  webssh2:latest
```

### Docker with Modern Security

```bash
docker run -d \
  -p 2222:2222 \
  -e WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_PRESET=modern \
  -e WEBSSH2_SSH_DISABLE_INTERACTIVE_AUTH=false \
  -e WEBSSH2_HEADER_TEXT="Secure SSH Gateway" \
  webssh2:latest
```

### Docker Compose

See `docker-compose.yml` for a complete example configuration.

## Kubernetes ConfigMap Example

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: webssh2-config
data:
  WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT: "2222"
  WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST: "ssh.example.com"
  WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_PRESET: "modern"
  WEBSSH2_HEADER_TEXT: "Kubernetes SSH Gateway"
  WEBSSH2_HEADER_BACKGROUND: "blue"
  WEBSSH2_HTTP_ORIGINS: "*.example.com,localhost:*"
```

## Environment-First vs Config File

### Advantages of Environment Variables

- **Security**: No secrets in config files
- **Flexibility**: Easy per-environment configuration
- **Cloud-native**: Works with Docker, Kubernetes, etc.
- **CI/CD friendly**: Easy automated deployment configuration

### When to Use Config Files

- **Development**: Easier to manage many settings locally
- **Complex configurations**: Multiple algorithm arrays
- **Documentation**: Comments and structure in JSON

### Hybrid Approach

You can use both - environment variables override config.json:

```bash
# config.json has base settings
# Environment variables override specific values
WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT=3000
WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST=prod.example.com
```

## Validation and Debugging

### Debug Configuration Loading

Enable debug output to see configuration loading:

```bash
DEBUG=webssh2:config,webssh2:envConfig npm start
```

### Validation Errors

If configuration validation fails, the server will:

1. Log validation errors
2. Continue with unvalidated config in development
3. Use default values for invalid settings

### Testing Configuration

Test your environment variable configuration:

```bash
node -e "
import { getConfig } from './app/config.js';
const config = await getConfig();
console.log(JSON.stringify(config, null, 2));
"
```

## Migration from Config File

### Step 1: Identify Current Settings

Review your current `config.json` and identify values to move to environment variables.

### Step 2: Set Environment Variables

Convert config paths to environment variable names:

- `listen.port` → `WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT`
- `ssh.algorithms.cipher` → `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_CIPHER`

### Step 3: Test Configuration

Verify environment variables take precedence over config file settings.

### Step 4: Remove Config File (Optional)

Once satisfied with environment variable configuration, you can remove `config.json`.

## Security Best Practices

1. **Never commit secrets** to version control
2. **Use secure secret management** for `WEBSSH2_SESSION_SECRET`
3. **Restrict algorithm presets** - use `strict` for high-security environments
4. **Validate origins** - don't use wildcard origins (`*:*`) in production
5. **Use HTTPS** in production environments
6. **Rotate session secrets** regularly

## Troubleshooting

### Environment Variables Not Taking Effect

1. Check variable names are correct (case-sensitive)
2. Ensure `WEBSSH2_` prefix is used
3. Enable debug output: `DEBUG=webssh2:envConfig`
4. Check for typos in boolean values (`true`/`false`)

### Array Parsing Issues  

1. Use comma-separated format for simple values
2. Use JSON format for complex values or special characters
3. Escape quotes properly in shell environments

### Algorithm Configuration Problems

1. Use presets (`modern`, `legacy`, `strict`) for simplicity
2. Individual algorithms must be valid SSH algorithm names
3. Check SSH2 library documentation for supported algorithms

## Support

For issues with environment variable configuration:

1. Enable debug output: `DEBUG=webssh2:*`
2. Check the configuration validation output
3. Review this documentation for correct variable names and formats
4. Test with minimal configuration first

Commit message:

feat(auth): implement SSH authentication method policy and parser
- Added support for configurable SSH authentication methods.
- Introduced `AuthMethod` and `AuthMethodToken` types for better type safety.
- Implemented `evaluateAuthMethodPolicy` to enforce allowed authentication methods.
- Created `resolveAllowedAuthMethods` to parse and validate authentication method configurations.
- Updated existing handlers and utilities to utilize the new authentication method policy.
- Enhanced tests to cover new authentication method functionalities and edge cases.
- Updated configuration templates and mocks to include allowed authentication methods.

fixes #442

DOCS/configuration/ENVIRONMENT-VARIABLES.md, after:

# WebSSH2 Environment Variables

WebSSH2 supports comprehensive configuration through environment variables, following the [12-Factor App](https://12factor.net/config) methodology. This makes it ideal for Docker containers, Kubernetes deployments, and cloud-native applications.

## Configuration Priority

Configuration is loaded with the following priority (highest to lowest):

1. **Environment Variables** (highest priority)
2. `config.json` file
3. Built-in defaults (lowest priority)

## Environment Variable Format

All WebSSH2 environment variables use the `WEBSSH2_` prefix with underscore-delimited paths:

```bash
WEBSSH2_<SECTION>_<SETTING>=value
```

### Examples

```bash
WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT=3000
WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST=example.com
WEBSSH2_HEADER_TEXT="Production Environment"
```

## Complete Environment Variable Reference

### Server Configuration

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_LISTEN_IP` | string | `0.0.0.0` | IP address to bind the server to |
| `WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT` | number | `2222` | Port number for the web server |
| `PORT` | number | `2222` | Legacy port variable (use WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT) |

### HTTP Configuration

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_HTTP_ORIGINS` | array | `["*:*"]` | CORS allowed origins (comma-separated or JSON) |

#### Array Format Examples

```bash
# Comma-separated format
WEBSSH2_HTTP_ORIGINS="localhost:3000,*.example.com,api.test.com"

# JSON array format
WEBSSH2_HTTP_ORIGINS='["localhost:3000","*.example.com","api.test.com"]'
```

### Security Headers & CSP

The server applies security headers and a Content Security Policy (CSP) by default.

- Configuration: Defined in code at `app/security-headers.js` and applied by `app/middleware.js`.
- Environment variables: There are currently no `WEBSSH2_` environment variables to toggle or customize CSP/headers.
- Customization options:
  - Edit `CSP_CONFIG` and `SECURITY_HEADERS` in `app/security-headers.js` for global changes.
  - Use `createCSPMiddleware(customCSP)` for route-specific CSP overrides.
  - HSTS (`Strict-Transport-Security`) is only added on HTTPS requests.

### User Defaults

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_USER_NAME` | string | `null` | Default username for SSH connections |
| `WEBSSH2_USER_PASSWORD` | string | `null` | Default password for SSH connections |
| `WEBSSH2_USER_PRIVATE_KEY` | string | `null` | Default private key (base64 encoded or file path) |
| `WEBSSH2_USER_PASSPHRASE` | string | `null` | Passphrase for encrypted private keys |

### SSH Configuration

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST` | string | `null` | Default SSH host to connect to |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_PORT` | number | `22` | Default SSH port |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_LOCAL_ADDRESS` | string | `null` | Local address for SSH connections |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_LOCAL_PORT` | number | `null` | Local port for SSH connections |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_TERM` | string | `xterm-color` | Terminal type |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_READY_TIMEOUT` | number | `20000` | Connection ready timeout (ms) |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_KEEPALIVE_INTERVAL` | number | `120000` | Keep-alive interval (ms) |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_KEEPALIVE_COUNT_MAX` | number | `10` | Maximum keep-alive count |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS` | array | `[]` | Allowed subnets - IPv4/IPv6 CIDR notation (comma-separated) |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALWAYS_SEND_KEYBOARD_INTERACTIVE` | boolean | `false` | Always send keyboard-interactive prompts to client |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_DISABLE_INTERACTIVE_AUTH` | boolean | `false` | Disable interactive authentication |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ENV_ALLOWLIST` | array | `[]` | Only these environment variable names are forwarded to SSH (comma-separated or JSON). Caps: max 50 pairs; key length ≤ 32; value length ≤ 512. |
| `WEBSSH2_AUTH_ALLOWED` | array | `password,keyboard-interactive,publickey` | Ordered allow list of SSH auth methods. Unknown tokens are ignored. If the list resolves to empty, startup fails. |

#### Authentication Allow List

`WEBSSH2_AUTH_ALLOWED` lets administrators enforce which SSH authentication methods can be used. Supported tokens are:

- `password`
- `keyboard-interactive`
- `publickey`

The list is evaluated in order and duplicates are removed automatically. Methods not included in the list are rejected before credentials are forwarded to the SSH server, and the UI exposes only the allowed choices. When the variable is unset, all three methods remain available (backward-compatible behaviour).

### SSH Subnet Restrictions

The `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS` variable enables network access control by restricting SSH connections to specific IP subnets. When configured, only hosts within the specified subnets can be accessed.

#### Features

- **IPv4 Support**: Full CIDR notation (/0 to /32), exact IPs, and wildcards
- **IPv6 Support**: Full CIDR notation (/0 to /128) and exact IPs
- **Mixed Networks**: Configure both IPv4 and IPv6 subnets together
- **DNS Resolution**: Hostnames are resolved and validated against allowed subnets

#### Subnet Format Examples

```bash
# IPv4 CIDR notation
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="192.168.1.0/24,10.0.0.0/8"

# IPv6 CIDR notation
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="2001:db8::/32,fe80::/10"

# Mixed IPv4 and IPv6
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="127.0.0.0/8,::1/128"

# Exact IP addresses
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="192.168.1.100,2001:db8::1"

# IPv4 wildcards (IPv4 only)
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="192.168.*.*,10.0.1.*"

# Complex example with all formats
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="10.0.0.0/8,192.168.1.100,172.16.*.*,::1/128,2001:db8::/32"
```

#### Common Use Cases

```bash
# Allow only localhost connections (IPv4 and IPv6)
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="127.0.0.0/8,::1/128"

# Allow only private networks (RFC 1918 + RFC 4193)
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="10.0.0.0/8,172.16.0.0/12,192.168.0.0/16,fc00::/7"

# Allow specific office network
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALLOWED_SUBNETS="203.0.113.0/24,2001:db8:1234::/48"
```

#### Important Notes

- When no subnets are specified, all connections are allowed (default behavior)
- Hostnames are resolved to IP addresses before validation
- If a hostname resolves to multiple IPs, connection is allowed if any IP matches
- Connection is blocked before SSH authentication if host is not in allowed subnets

### SSH Algorithms

You can configure SSH algorithms in two ways:

#### Option 1: Algorithm Preset (Recommended)

| Variable | Values | Description |
|----------|--------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_PRESET` | `modern`, `legacy`, `strict` | Use predefined algorithm sets |

**Preset Details:**

- **`modern`**: Strong algorithms for contemporary systems
- **`legacy`**: Compatible with older SSH implementations  
- **`strict`**: Only the most secure algorithms

#### Option 2: Individual Algorithm Arrays

| Variable | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_CIPHER` | array | Encryption algorithms |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_KEX` | array | Key exchange algorithms |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_HMAC` | array | MAC algorithms |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_COMPRESS` | array | Compression algorithms |
| `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_SERVER_HOST_KEY` | array | Server host key algorithms |

#### Algorithm Examples

```bash
# Using preset (recommended)
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_PRESET=modern

# Using individual arrays
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_CIPHER="aes256-gcm@openssh.com,aes128-gcm@openssh.com"
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_KEX="ecdh-sha2-nistp256,ecdh-sha2-nistp384"
```

### Web Interface

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_HEADER_TEXT` | string | `null` | Header text in web interface |
| `WEBSSH2_HEADER_BACKGROUND` | string | `green` | Header background color |

### Logging

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_FORMAT` | string | `json` | Structured log output format (`json` only at present) |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_LEVEL` | string | `info` | Global minimum log level (`debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error`) |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_STDOUT_ENABLED` | boolean | `true` | Enables stdout transport when `true` |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_STDOUT_MIN_LEVEL` | string | `info` | Per-transport minimum level for stdout delivery |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_ENABLED` | boolean | `false` | Enables RFC 5424/TLS syslog forwarding |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_HOST` | string | `null` | Syslog collector hostname or IP |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_PORT` | number | `6514` | Syslog collector port (TLS default) |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_APP_NAME` | string | `webssh2` | Syslog `APP-NAME` field |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_ENTERPRISE_ID` | number | `32473` | Enterprise ID for structured data (`webssh2@<ID>`) |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_TLS_ENABLED` | boolean | `true` | Enables TLS transport as per RFC 5425 |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_TLS_CA_FILE` | string | `null` | Path to CA bundle when TLS is enabled |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_TLS_CERT_FILE` | string | `null` | Path to client certificate for mutual TLS |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_TLS_KEY_FILE` | string | `null` | Path to private key paired with client cert |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_TLS_REJECT_UNAUTHORIZED` | boolean | `true` | Reject syslog server certificates failing validation |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_BUFFER_SIZE` | number | `1000` | Maximum in-memory message backlog before drop |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_FLUSH_INTERVAL_MS` | number | `1000` | Flush cadence for buffered syslog messages |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SYSLOG_INCLUDE_JSON` | boolean | `false` | Attach JSON payload after syslog structured data |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SAMPLING_DEFAULT_RATE` | number | `1` | Default probability (0-1) for emitting sampled events |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SAMPLING_RULES` | string | `null` | JSON array of sampling overrides (`[{"target":"*","sampleRate":0.25}]`) |
| `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_RATE_LIMIT_RULES` | string | `null` | JSON describing token-bucket rules (`[{"target":"ssh_command","limit":5,"intervalMs":1000,"burst":5}]`) |

> **Note:** Wrap complex JSON values (such as `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_RATE_LIMIT_RULES` or `WEBSSH2_LOGGING_SAMPLING_RULES`) in single quotes to prevent shell interpolation. Sampling rules can be supplied via `config.json` for richer targeting (per-event overrides).

## Quick Start Examples

Set common settings using environment variables (preferred):

```bash
# Listen on port 2222 and allow all origins during development
WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT=2222 \
WEBSSH2_HTTP_ORIGINS="*:*" \

# Default SSH target
WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST=ssh.example.com \
WEBSSH2_SSH_PORT=22 \
WEBSSH2_SSH_TERM=xterm-256color \

# UI header
WEBSSH2_HEADER_TEXT="WebSSH2" \
WEBSSH2_HEADER_BACKGROUND=green \

# Behavior options
WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_ALLOW_RECONNECT=true \
WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_ALLOW_REAUTH=true \
WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_ALLOW_REPLAY=true \

# Security: algorithms preset
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_PRESET=modern
```

Examples with Docker (inline `-e` flags):

```bash
docker run --name webssh2 --rm -it \
  -p 2222:2222 \
  -e WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT=2222 \
  -e WEBSSH2_HTTP_ORIGINS="*:*" \
  -e WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST=ssh.example.com \
  -e WEBSSH2_SSH_PORT=22 \
  -e WEBSSH2_HEADER_TEXT="WebSSH2" \
  -e WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_PRESET=modern \
  webssh2
```

### Application Options

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_CHALLENGE_BUTTON` | boolean | `true` | Show challenge button |
| `WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_AUTO_LOG` | boolean | `false` | Enable automatic logging |
| `WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_ALLOW_REAUTH` | boolean | `true` | Allow reauthentication |
| `WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_ALLOW_RECONNECT` | boolean | `true` | Allow reconnection |
| `WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_ALLOW_REPLAY` | boolean | `true` | Allow session replay |
| `WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_REPLAY_CRLF` | boolean | `false` | Send CRLF for credential replay (default is CR) |

### Session Management

| Variable | Type | Default | Description |
|----------|------|---------|-------------|
| `WEBSSH2_SESSION_SECRET` | string | auto-generated | Session encryption secret |
| `WEBSSH2_SESSION_NAME` | string | `webssh2.sid` | Session cookie name |

## Data Type Formats

### Boolean Values

Use `true`/`false` or `1`/`0`:

```bash
WEBSSH2_OPTIONS_AUTO_LOG=true
WEBSSH2_SSH_DISABLE_INTERACTIVE_AUTH=false
```

### Array Values

Two formats supported:

**Comma-separated (simple values):**

```bash
WEBSSH2_HTTP_ORIGINS="localhost:3000,*.example.com"
```

**JSON array (complex values or special characters):**

```bash
WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_CIPHER='["aes256-gcm@openssh.com","aes128-ctr"]'
```

### Null Values

Use empty string or `null`:

```bash
WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST=
WEBSSH2_USER_NAME=null
```

## Docker Examples

### Basic Docker Run

```bash
docker run -d \
  -p 2222:2222 \
  -e WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST=ssh.example.com \
  -e WEBSSH2_HEADER_TEXT="Production SSH" \
  -e WEBSSH2_HEADER_BACKGROUND=red \
  -e WEBSSH2_SESSION_SECRET=your-secret-key \
  webssh2:latest
```

### Docker with Modern Security

```bash
docker run -d \
  -p 2222:2222 \
  -e WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_PRESET=modern \
  -e WEBSSH2_SSH_DISABLE_INTERACTIVE_AUTH=false \
  -e WEBSSH2_HEADER_TEXT="Secure SSH Gateway" \
  webssh2:latest
```

### Docker Compose

See `docker-compose.yml` for a complete example configuration.

## Kubernetes ConfigMap Example

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  name: webssh2-config
data:
  WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT: "2222"
  WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST: "ssh.example.com"
  WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_PRESET: "modern"
  WEBSSH2_HEADER_TEXT: "Kubernetes SSH Gateway"
  WEBSSH2_HEADER_BACKGROUND: "blue"
  WEBSSH2_HTTP_ORIGINS: "*.example.com,localhost:*"
```

## Environment-First vs Config File

### Advantages of Environment Variables

- **Security**: No secrets in config files
- **Flexibility**: Easy per-environment configuration
- **Cloud-native**: Works with Docker, Kubernetes, etc.
- **CI/CD friendly**: Easy automated deployment configuration

### When to Use Config Files

- **Development**: Easier to manage many settings locally
- **Complex configurations**: Multiple algorithm arrays
- **Documentation**: Comments and structure in JSON

### Hybrid Approach

You can use both - environment variables override config.json:

```bash
# config.json has base settings
# Environment variables override specific values
WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT=3000
WEBSSH2_SSH_HOST=prod.example.com
```

## Validation and Debugging

### Debug Configuration Loading

Enable debug output to see configuration loading:

```bash
DEBUG=webssh2:config,webssh2:envConfig npm start
```

### Validation Errors

If configuration validation fails, the server will:

1. Log validation errors
2. Continue with unvalidated config in development
3. Use default values for invalid settings

### Testing Configuration

Test your environment variable configuration:

```bash
node -e "
import { getConfig } from './app/config.js';
const config = await getConfig();
console.log(JSON.stringify(config, null, 2));
"
```

## Migration from Config File

### Step 1: Identify Current Settings

Review your current `config.json` and identify values to move to environment variables.

### Step 2: Set Environment Variables

Convert config paths to environment variable names:

- `listen.port` → `WEBSSH2_LISTEN_PORT`
- `ssh.algorithms.cipher` → `WEBSSH2_SSH_ALGORITHMS_CIPHER`

### Step 3: Test Configuration

Verify environment variables take precedence over config file settings.

### Step 4: Remove Config File (Optional)

Once satisfied with environment variable configuration, you can remove `config.json`.

## Security Best Practices

1. **Never commit secrets** to version control
2. **Use secure secret management** for `WEBSSH2_SESSION_SECRET`
3. **Restrict algorithm presets** - use `strict` for high-security environments
4. **Validate origins** - don't use wildcard origins (`*:*`) in production
5. **Use HTTPS** in production environments
6. **Rotate session secrets** regularly

## Troubleshooting

### Environment Variables Not Taking Effect

1. Check variable names are correct (case-sensitive)
2. Ensure `WEBSSH2_` prefix is used
3. Enable debug output: `DEBUG=webssh2:envConfig`
4. Check for typos in boolean values (`true`/`false`)

### Array Parsing Issues  

1. Use comma-separated format for simple values
2. Use JSON format for complex values or special characters
3. Escape quotes properly in shell environments

### Algorithm Configuration Problems

1. Use presets (`modern`, `legacy`, `strict`) for simplicity
2. Individual algorithms must be valid SSH algorithm names
3. Check SSH2 library documentation for supported algorithms

## Support

For issues with environment variable configuration:

1. Enable debug output: `DEBUG=webssh2:*`
2. Check the configuration validation output
3. Review this documentation for correct variable names and formats
4. Test with minimal configuration first
